Q: What Questions do I need to work on?
A: 7, 47, 68, 69, 75, 135, 137, 40, 163

<!-- Pathology -->
Q: What is CNV?
A: CNV is Copy Number Variances. It is when a stretch of DNA that is 1kb or larger that has a different number of copies when compared to the reference genome.
Q: what is triplet repeat disorder?
A: increase in nucleotide triplet repeats (e.g CAGCAGCAG….CAG) within a certain gene. Threshold of occurrence – if triplet repeat occurs above a certain frequency, then more likely to cause disease. For example, in Huntington's disease, Normal range is 10 to 26, Premutation is 27 to 41, and Affected is 36 to 121.
Source: http://hihg.med.miami.edu/code/http/modules/education/Design/Print.asp?CourseNum=2
Q: Why is the triplet repeat disorder considered dynamic or unstable mutation?
A: The gene is passed from parent to offspring, the number of triplet repeats may increase. In this way, the condition may worsen (be more severe) or have an earlier onset from generation to generation (genetic anticipation).
Q: What is epistasis?
A: Phenomenon where gene interactions (i.e. proteins interactions) lead to detectable phenotypic changes.
Q: What is structural variants?
A: variation in chromosome structure approximately 1kb or larger, such as inversions, translocation (switching of chromosomal region)
Q: what are Alu elements? Are these incorporated in the genome by viruses?
A: retrotransposons, ~300nt long, belonging to the family of short interspersed elements (SINEs).
Q: What are transposable elements
A: DNA segments that can "jump" from one region of the genome to another. Transposable elements have inverted sequences at their ends, meaning they have identical sequences reading in opposite directions (e.g. 5'-AATC-3' on one end & 5'-CTAA-3' on other end). Apparently this is a source of cryptic exons.
Source: Lessons from non-canonical splicing (Sibley, Blazques, Ule / 2016 / Nature Reviews Genetics)
Q: Types of transposable elements?
A: There are 2 classes of transposons: Class I is retrotransposons ("copy & paste mechanism" - transcribe into RNA, reverse transcribe into DNA, and then add elsewhere to genome). Class II is DNA elements that can be "cut & pasted" from one region to another using transposase (enzyme that cuts transposon out and places it elsewhere in genome). I'm assuming transposons need to be able to code for the enzymes needed (reverse transcriptase & transposase).
Q: how do I tell the difference between a SNP & a mutation?
A: So a SNP (single nucleotide polymorphism) is a type of mutation where a single nucleotide is changed, but it is a mutation that has been validated to be present in more than 1% of the population. This is validated by Genome-Wide Association Studies. Mutations are any change to the genome (including indels?) that is less than 1% prevalent in the population. 
Q: how do I tell the difference between an SNP & an SNV?
A: CONJ: I think SNV (single nucleotide variant) & SNP (single nucleotide polymorphism) are both a change to a single mutation, but an SNV is present below 1% of the population whereas an SNP is present in >=1% of the population.

<!-- Immunology -->
Q: What is CD4?
A: co-receptor that assists the T cell receptor in communicating with APCs (antigen-presenting cells). CD4 binds to antigen on cell surface -> activates pathways necessary for helper cell signaling (signaling other cells, maybe macrophages?) to assist in immune response.
Q: What is immunogenicity?
A: the likelihood of generating an immune response. High immunogenicity means high likelihood of immune response. Low immunogenicity means a low likelihood of immune response.
Q: How are neoantigens detected by scientists?
A: Find proteins that are present in tumors that are not present in normal cells. Amino acid changes in these proteins can be caused by mutations, splicing, and indels. But not all peptides are presented by MHC, need to see if peptide will bind to MHC's active site.
Q: What are antigen-presenting cells (APCs)?
A: Antigen-presenting cells (APCs) are a heterogeneous group of immune cells that mediate the cellular immune response by processing and presenting antigens for recognition by certain lymphocytes such as T cells.
Q: How do APCs work?
A: APCs (e.g. macrophages, dendritic cells) first target the foreign target (e.g. bacteria, virus), degrades the foreign target's proteins into peptides, and then MHC proteins bind to foreign peptide (signal of the foreign target) and are presented onto the APC's cell surface.
Q: What are neoORFs?
A: NeoORF is long, completely novel stretches of amino acids. Usually generated by out-of-frame insertions or deletions in gene.
Q: How are neoantigens found by scientists?
A: 1 - Looking for nonsynonymous mutations in tumor tissue. 2 - using algorithms to identify peptides with the potential to bind to HLA proteins.
Q: What are the 3 phases of immunoediting?
A: elimination -> equilibrium -> escape.
Q: What is immunosurveillance?
A: Immunosurveillance is the process of finding transformed cells (cancer cells) in order to inhibit growth of neoplastic tissue. This is the first step of immunoediting.
Q: What is immune tolerance?
A: State of the immune system where it does not respond to antigens that would usually elicit an immune response
Q: What are some errors in RNA-seq?
A: 1 - biases in amplifying transcripts based on G-C content, priming with random hexamers, cDNA synthesis, ligation. 2 - transcript-length bias as longer transcripts generate more fragments. 3 - mapping error caused by multimapping, repetitive sequences, sequencing errors. 4 - polyA mRNA enrichment - may enrich for RNA degradation products (what does this mean? are degradation products usually have polyA tails?).
Q: What are some sources of error from RNA-seq?
A: Data from real genomes aren't exactly have a Poisson distribution, due to biases related to the composition of the genome, chemistry of sequencing, assembly errors in the reference genome, and inability to map to repetitive regions.
Source: https://www.biostars.org/p/84445/
Q: For sequencing, why is there a bias towards GC content?
A: It's a numbers game - the more of a strand, the more likely it's sequenced. 1 - PCR amplifies GC-rich strands more easily than AT-rich strands (AT-rich strands fragile, GC-rich strands are sturdy - probably based on bond strength) -> more GC-rich strands than AT-rich strands. Seems that more GC-balanced regions have better coverage than regions that are GC-poor or GC-rich. CONJ: GC-poor regions are AT-rich, perhaps harder to sequence because more fragile; GC-rich regions have more H-bonds, therefore stronger -> harder to melt strands from each other (therefore harder to sequence).
Source: Effects of GC Bias in Next-Generation-Sequencing Data on De Novo Genome Assembly (Chen, Liu / 2013)
Q: What are the steps of PCR?
A: separate DNA strands by increasing temperature (~94 C) -> lower temperature so primers bind to DNA strand (50-60 C) -> polymerase then synthesizes the complement (~72 C) -> repeat
Q: For PCR, why is there bias towards GC content?
A: (Chex) more GC content - easier to PCR amplify because more stable, whereas more AT content - hard to PCR amplify because less stable (more fragile). It's harder to sequence AT-rich genomes.
Q: what is DNA base stacking?
A: Base stacking stabilizes the DNA helix. Ring portions of nucleobases are hydrophobic - interact via hydrophobic bonding of their pi-cloud electrons & van der waals. Purines (A,G) have 2 rings while pyrimidines (C,U,T) have 1 ring (does this mean 2 rings are more hydrophobic? Stronger base stack interactions?).
Q: what are professional APCs?
A: CONJ: I think professional APCs are cells (macrophages, dendritic cells, B cells) that present pathogenic peptides via MHC (this is antigen presentation) to prime naive T cells so then the T cells can become trained to look for specific antigens - naive T cells become effector T cells. Professional APCs are in T-cell-dependent areas, which leads me to believe these cells specialize in training naive T cells.
Q: What are some of the functions of professional APCs?
A: Dendritic cells present antigens to activate naive T cells for expansion and differentiation. Macrophages & B cells present antigen to receive help from effector T cells either by signal via cytokines or surface molecules.
Q: what are non-professional APCs?
A: CONJ: non-professional APCs are cells that present pathogenic peptides via MHC class 1 proteins for detection by effector T cells for destruction, but are not cells that train naive T-cells to identify specific pathogenic peptides.
Q: what is the difference between professional and non-professional APCs?
A: CONJ: 1) MHC 2 genes expressed by professional APCs and MHC 1 genes expressed by non-professional APCs, 2) Pro APCs prime naive T cells to effector T cells whereas non-Pro APCs just present antigen to be detected by effector T cells. The non-pro APCs are the infected cells.
Q: What are autoreactive T cells?
A: T cells that attack the host's own healthy cells.
Q: what is a helper T cell?
A: immune cells that coordinate other immune cells to respond to a certain region. Helpers secrete cytokines to call other cells.
Q: how does a helper T cell work?
A: helper T cells bind to macrophages presenting pathogenic peptide antigens on its surface. Only helper T cells with receptors that match cell surface antigens bind -> produce more helper T cells that recognize that antigen.
Q: what is a cytotoxic T cell?
A: immune cell that binds to cells expressing foreign antigen on infected cells. Once bound to antigen + HLA complex presented on the APC's cell surface, the cytotoxic T cell secretes perforin, which destroys the infected cell.
Q: what is an effector T cell?
A: CONJ?? - Is it the differentiated T cell after the helper T cell binds to a foreign antigen. I think effector T cells are naive T cells that are trained by professional APCs (e.g. dendritic cells) as to be trained to look for specific foreign antigens. Idea is similar to machine learning where algorithm is trained to look for specific element/pattern.
Q: what is HLA?
A: Human leukocyte antigens. HLA are genes that encode the MHC proteins. There are 3 HLA genes for MHC class 1 genes & 6 HLA genes for MHC class 2 genes. In humas, HLA is synonymous to MHC.
Q: What is the function of MHC class 1 genes?
A: MHC class 1 genes produce proteins that are present on the surface of almost all cells. These proteins present protein fragments exported from within the cell to the immune system. MHC 1 genes expressed in non-professional APCs to interact with cytotoxic T cells.
Q: What is the function of MHC class 2 genes?
A: MHC class 2 genes produce proteins that present protein fragments (peptides) on cell surface, usually peptides from immunogenic foreign target (Is it always highly immunogenic?). MHC II mainly interact with helper T cells.
Q: what does allogeneic mean?
A: tissues or cells that are genetically dissimilar and therefore are immunologically incompatible, even within the same species (does this mean the immune system will recognize it as 'non-self').
Q: What is passive immunotherapy?
A: inject molecules in the body to facilitate immune response against tumor cells. It is passive because it does not require the immune system to kill the cancer cells. Specific passive immunotherapy is directly targeting tumor antigens using monoclonal antibodies, cytotoxic T cell clones or tumor infiltrating lymphocytes -> sets off a cascade of events to destroy cancer cell (antibodies does not need the immune system). Non-specific passive immunotherapy -> use cytokines, macrophages to target & kill cancer cells directly.
Source: https://www.asbestos.com/treatment/immunotherapy/, http://www.cel-sci.com/passive_immunotherapy.html
Q: What is active immunotherapy?
A: Active because requires innate immune system to kill cancer cells. Cancer vaccines contains cancer cells, part of cells or tumor-specific antigens train the immune system to identify cancer cell signals. Adjuvants can help boost immune response.
Source: http://www.cel-sci.com/active_immunotherapy.html
Q: What are the types of active immunotherapy?
A: 2 types of immunotherapy: 1) cell-based where a patient's cancer cells & immune cells are used to train the immune cells ex vivo and then re-injected into the patient to target the cancer cells, 2) vector-based vaccine where an engineered virus, or other vector, is used to introduce cancer specific proteins and other molecules to the patient in order to stimulate the patient's immune system to recognize the tumor cells and fight the cancer.
Source: http://www.cel-sci.com/active_immunotherapy.html
Q: How does the immune system attack tumor tissue?
A: See image in source
Source: See KnowledgeTweets post "2016.10.4 – Immune system in regulating tumor growth"



<!-- Transcription Biology -->
Q: What is the 5' & 3' end of DNA and RNA?
A: Refers to the 5' carbon & 3' carbon in the sugar base.
Source: see KnowledgeTweets 2016.9.7 – What is the 5’ & 3’ of DNA?
Q: What is the sense strand? Antisense strand?
A: Sense strand is the DNA strand that has the same sequence as the RNA transcribed from it (e.g. ACCTG & ACCUG). This is called the coding strand (NOTE: there are protein-coding & non-coding genes, so not always protein-coding).
Q: What is the antisense strand?
A: Antisense strand is the DNA strand that complements the RNA strand transcribed from it. Therefore it is the template strand in the gene.
Q: What is the Watson & Crick strands?
A: The "top", "forward", and "plus" be used as synonyms for the Watson strand and "bottom", "reverse", and "minus" for the Crick strand.
Source: The multiple personalities of Watson and Crick strands (Cartwright, Graur / 2011)
Q: What is a Pribnow box?
A: The starting point for transcription in prokaryotes. It is around 10 bp upstream of transcription start site. Prokaryotes have Pribnow box, Eukaryotes and Archaea have TATA box.
Q: What is oncogene addiction?
A: biological phenomenon where cancer cells depend on single, mutated oncogene. I’m not sure how accurate this model is to actual cancer cells.
Q: What are ways of kinases escaping from kinase inhibitors?
A: 1 - mutations that confer resistance to drug, 2 - decrease in deactivation of kinase or downregulate phosphatase (e.g. decrease protein that decreases activity of a kinase), 3 - upregulate protein that increases kinase activity
Q: How to identify which kinases are good therapeutic targets?
A: See if gene is overexpressed, which would lead to overproduction of protein, or see if protein is overactivated, which would change the activity of downstream substrates. 
Q: What direction does DNA replication go in?
A: DNA polymerase polymerizes DNA from 5' to 3' direction while reading the original DNA strand from 3' to 5' direction (similar to RNA Pol II reading template strand 3' to 5' direction by making RNA from 5' to 3'), where DNA polymerase adds nucleotides to the 3' end of the DNA. Note that 5' carbon is bonded to the phosphate group and the 3' carbon has a hydroxyl group (-OH).
Q: Why does DNA replicate in the 5' to 3' direction?
A: CONJ: I do know that ATP first binds to the 5' carbon of DNA, and I think the 3' hydroxyl group (-OH) nucleophilically attacks the phosphate, ejecting the diphosphate group (-PP), which is energetically favorable because of releasing the close proximity of the negative charges.
Q: What direction does RNA polymerase go in?
A: The RNA Polymerase transcribes the template strand from the 3' to 5' direction, synthesizing the mRNA from 5' to 3' (reads 3' to 5', writes 5' to 3'). Moves along coding strand 5' to 3' direction, though the coding strand isn't used by RNA polymerase. 
Q: What is the 5' cap on mRNA?
A: 7-methylguanosine cap is added to the 5' end of the pre-mRNA while elongation is still in progress. The 5' cap protects the nascent mRNA from degradation and assists in ribosome binding during translation.
Q: When does 5' capping of mRNA occur?
A: A modified guanosine base (7-methylguanosine) is placed on the 5' end of the mRNA shortly after transcription begins, so capping happens in tandem with transcription.
Q: what adds the 5' cap to mRNA?
A: capping enzyme complex (CEC) adds the 7' methylgunaosine to the 5' end of mRNA. CEC is specific to RNA Pol II because phosphorylated carboxyl-terminal domain on RNAP II, therefore CEC is specific for mRNA.
Q: what enzyme adds polyA tail to end of mRNA? 
A: polyadenylate polymerase is the enzyme that adds the polyA tail to the end of the mRNA. It adds around 250 adenosine nucleotides. Interestingly, the polyA tail is shortened over time and when it is short enough, it is enyzmatically degraded.
Source: Regulation of mRNA stability in mammalian cells (Guhaniyogi, Brewer / 2002)
Q: when is polyA tail added to end of the mRNA?
A: The polyA tail is added to the mRNA after transcription. Transcription ceases -> mRNA chain cleaved by endonuclease complex associated with RNA polymerase -> polyA tail added at 3’ end cleave site by polyadenylate polymerase
Q: What is the job of the endonuclease complex that is associated with RNA Polymerase?
A: After transcription, there is a AAUAAA sequence 11-30 nucleotides upstream of where the polyA tail is added. This sequence is cleaved by the endonuclease complex before adding the polyA tail.
Q: What are 2 forms of mRNA degradation?
A: deadenylation-dependent and deadenylation-independent.
Q: What is deadenylation-dependent mRNA degradation?
A: there is 3' to 5' mRNA degradation that requires deadenylase (e.g. CCR4_NOT or PARN) & 5' to 3' degradation that requires Lsm1-7 and decapping complex.
Q: What is deadenylation-independent mRNA degradation?
A: there is 5' decapping pathway (using DCP1-DCP2 complex) or endonuclease the cleaves mRNA into 2 fragment - exosomes (3’ to 5’ degradation) & nuclease XRN1 (5’ to 3’ degradation) then degrade the 2 fragments.
Q: What is an exosome?
A: Multiprotein complex that degrades various types of RNA.
Q: What is the methylation mark H3K4me3 & H3K36me3 mean biologically?
A: Genes with H3K4me3 marks at promoter & H3K36me3 marks along length of transcribed region is a signature of actively transcribed genes.
Source: see KnowledgeTweets post 8.13.2014 - Paper: Chromatin signature reveals over a thousand highly conserved large non-coding RNAs in mammals. (Guttman, Amit / 2009 / Nature) 
Q: what is a non-coding exon?
A: a non-coding exon does not code amino acids for a protein. Non-coding exons usually code the UTRs (untranslated regions) of the gene (3' UTR & 5' UTR). Sometimes the UTR can span multiple exons, which means a UTR can contain splice sites that are ligated together during transcript processing. Look at the source for an image of the structure of a gene.
Source: http://useast.ensembl.org/info/genome/variation/predicted_data.html#consequences, http://useast.ensembl.org/info/genome/variation/consequences.jpg
Q: How does transcription begin in eukaryotes?
A: Promoter is upstream of gene -> to initiate transcription, transcription factor TFIID bindis to the TATA box -> transcription factors bind to the promoter region -> once transcription initiation complex is assembled, RNA Polymerase II binds to complex -> RNAP II is phosphorylated -> part of the RNAP II is released from the DNA in order to activate the transcription initiation complex. NOTE: longer promoters tend to mean that more transcription factors can bind to the promoter.
Source: https://www.boundless.com/biology/textbooks/boundless-biology-textbook/gene-expression-16/eukaryotic-gene-regulation-113/the-promoter-and-the-transcription-machinery-457-11683/
Q: does pre-mRNA have a polyA tail?
A: CONJ: I think pre-mRNA is first cleaved by an protein complex (perhaps the endonuclease complex) and then the polyA tail is synthesized using polyadenylate polymerase. Note that the polyA tail can be added to different sites at the end of the transcript - this is known as alternative polyadenylation (similar to alternative splicing).
Q: Where does transcription (actual synthesis of mRNA) begin?
A: Transcription begins at the transcription start site (TSS), which is a bit downstream of the promoter.
Q: What are parts of the promoter?
A: CONJ: There are 3 parts of the promoter: the core promoter, proximal promoter, and distal promoter. Core - TSS, binding site for RNA polymerase binding, & general transcription factor binding sites (e.g. TATA box). Proximal - tends to have regulatory elements, usually 250 bp upstream of TSS. Distal - other regulatory elements (usually weaker regulatory elements, but not enhancers).
Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Promoter_(genetics)
Q: What are the ways an mRNA transcript can vary from a gene?
A: 1. alternative promoter usage - using a different promoter to start transcription, 2. alternative termination site, or differential 3' termination, 3. alternative splicing, excluding or incorporating different combination of exons, 4. Apparently there is a mechanism of exon shuffling during transcription (I think I read this somewhere, not sure where), 5. chromosomal rearrangement
Source: Regulation of gene expression by alternative promoters (Ayoubi / 1996)
Q: What is alternative polyadenylation?
A: An RNA-processing mechanism that generates distinct 3′ termini on mRNAs and other RNA polymerase II transcripts. Occurs in 3' UTR of mRNA -> confers mRNA with different length 3' UTR
Q: How does alternative polyadenylation (APA) regulate RNA?
A: APA exhibits tissue specificity; APA can regulate cell proliferation & differentiation; APA modulation of mRNA stability, translation, nuclear export and cellular localization.
Source: Alternative polyadenylation of mRNA precursors (Tian, Manley / 2016)
Q: What is RNA editing?
A: RNA editing is when the RNA molecule has been modified (e.g. mRNA). The editing occurs after transcription but before translation. Forms of RNA editing could be either "mutation" (changing a base) or "indel" (insertion/deletion).
Source: http://www.biology-pages.info/R/RNA_Editing.html


<!-- NMD Biology -->
Q: what is the Exon Junction Complex (EJC)?
A: protein complex that demonstrably designate exon-exon junctions spliced together. EJC are ~20-24nt upstream exon-exon junctions. EJC are comprised of proteins UPF1, 2, & 3.
Q: What is the up-frameshift (UPF) proteins?
A: These proteins make up the Exon-Junction Complex (EJC). During translation, if any EJCs are still remaining on the mRNA transcript, then this means there is an early stop codon in the transcript and NMD is activated.
Q: when is Nonsense-Mediated Decay (NMD) activated?
A: NMD is activated during translation. EJC are removed from transcript when translating, but if any EJC are left after the ribosome encounters a stop codon, then this is considered an early stop codon & the transcript is degraded. Even performed an experiment where artificial added EJC after normally-occurring PTC and this still triggered NMD.
Q: how can premature termination codon (PTC) escape from NMD?
A: if the PTC is closer than ~50nt to EJC. There is also an instance in beta-globin where a PTC in the last exon evades NMD, producing truncated proteins -> can lead to Beta-Thalassemia disease.
Source: Nonsense-Mediated mRNA Decay in Health and Disease (Frischmeyer, Dietz / 1999)
Q: What genomic events can produce truncated proteins?
A: if PTC is closer than ~50nt to EJC (NMD-irrelevant) or in case of beta-globin having a PTC in the last exon, this produces truncated proteins. There is another class of PTC transcripts, NMD-escape, that evade NMD but they do not produce truncated proteins. Also, NMD-deficient cells can lead to truncated proteins
Source: Nonsense-Mediated mRNA Decay in Health and Disease (Frischmeyer, Dietz / 1999), Selective Translational Repression of Truncated Proteins from Frameshift Mutation-Derived mRNAs in Tumors (You, Li / 2007)
Q: how can premature termination codon (PTC) escape from NMD?
A: the PTC is closer than the ~50nt requirement (NMD-irrelevant), or other unknown mechanism (NMD-escape). What is NMD-escape mRNA transcripts?? Also, SpliceSeqV2 algorithm states that if a stop codon is 50nt upstream of splice junction, it is a likely target of NMD.
Source: Selective Translational Repression of Truncated Proteins from Frameshift Mutation-Derived mRNAs in Tumors (You, Li / 2007); http://bioinformatics.mdanderson.org/main/SpliceSeqV2:Methods
Q: Which type of transcripts escape NMD? Can produce truncated proteins?
A: 3 types of NMD categories: NMD-sensitive mRNAs, which are degraded by the NMD system; NMD-escape mRNAs, which are not degraded by the NMD system, but do experience repression of protein expression; and NMD-irrelevant mRNAs, which are not recognized by the NMD system, and generate truncated proteins.
Source: Selective Translational Repression of Truncated Proteins from Frameshift Mutation-Derived mRNAs in Tumors (You, Li / 2007)

<!-- Splicing Biology -->
Q: Where is the donor-acceptor sites on the exons?
A: The donor site is on the 5' end of the intron and the acceptor site is on the 3' end of the intron, regardless of the gene strand sign (i.e. plus or minus gene). The donor splice site has a 5'-AG|GT-3' (mRNA: 5'-AG|GU-3'), where the AG is in the exon and GT is in the intron. The acceptor splice site has 5'-AG-3' in the intron right before the acceptor splice site. NOTE: I believe the donor & acceptor splice site sequences are on the coding strand, not template strand.
Q: For gene splicing, how does the splicing reaction work?
A: There are 2 reactions during splicing - Rxn 1: 2' hydroxyl group (-OH) on branch site attacks the phosphate group on 5' splice site (splice donor). This rxn releases the 5' exon and forms a lariat intermediate. Rxn 2: 3' hydroyxl group on the 5' exon that was released will attack the phosphate on the 3' splice site, releasing the lariat and fusing the 5' exon to the 3' exon. Note that this is all happening while the spliceosome is holding the transcript together.
Source: see KnowledgeTweets - 10.1.2014 - Exons & alternative splicing
Q: what is the point of 0-based?
A: so the 0-based system allows to easily calculate the length & describe the range. For instance, 2 <= i < 12 is the same as 1 < i <= 12, 1 < i < 13, 2 <= i <= 12, but the first 2 of the 4 convey the length clearly (12 - 2 + 1 & 12 - 1). For describing the range, if start with 1 --> length will be 1 <= i < N + 1. Whereas if start with 0, then the range is 0 <= i < N.
Source: http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/EWD/transcriptions/EWD08xx/EWD831.html
Q: What is a null mutation?
A: mutation that stops or 'nullifies' the function of that gene. Can also prevent function by inhibiting transcription or translation of gene.
Q: Average length of exons and introns?
A: Exons are on average 145 base pairs long, whereas introns are 10 times this size and can be longer.
Q: Some genes do not have introns, why?
A: Apparently there is a strong correlation between gene expression and intron density, meaning the higher the intron density (the # of introns per kilobase, probably measured by total # intronic nucleotides/total # of nucleotides), the higher the gene expression
Q: How frequent should splicing defects arise in cancer?
A: Some stats: 15-60% of known disease-causing mutations affect splicing. At least 15% to perhaps as high as 50% of genetic disease arise from mutations either in consensus splice site sequences or auxiliary cis-acting splice sites (ESE, ESS, ISE, ISS).
Source: Understanding alternative splicing: towards a cellular code. (Matlin, Clark / 2005 / Nature Reviews: Molecular Cellular Biology), see KnowledgeTweets post "15.6.16 – Splice junctions and disease"
Q: What is the statistics on alternative splicing?
A: 60% of alternative splicing is cassette exon or mutually exclusive exons, whereas 40% is the competing 5’ & 3’ splice sites (see KnowledgeTweets - 15.6.16 – Splice junctions and disease).
Q: What is a cassette exon?
A: Cassette exon: a non-constitutive exon, therefore it can either be included or excluded from the final mature mRNA.
Q: What is a mutually exclusive exon?
A: Mutually exclusive exons: 2 exons where only one or the other is incorporated into the final mature mRNA.
Q: What is a competing 5' splice sites?
A: Competing 5’ splice sites: splice sites on 5’ end of exon that compete. There are 3 categories - strong, intermediate, & weak, and usually the strongest categories wins.
Q: What is a competing 3' splice site?
A: Competing 3’ splice site: splice site on 3’ of exon that can splice at the end of the exon (at the acceptor splice site) or within the exon.
Q: How can splicing lead to disease?
A: 1 - Cis-acting mutations that disrupt constitutive splice sites, 2 - Cis-acting mutations that disrupt use of alternative splice sites, 3 - trans-acting mutations that disrupt basal splicing machinery, 4 - trans-acting mutations that disrupt splicing regulation.
Q: What mechanisms increase transcript diversity from a gene?
A: alternative promoter usage, alternative polyadenylation site usage, & alternative splicing increases the repetoire of transcripts generated by a transcript.
Q: What are some instances of aberrant splicing in cancer?
A: 1) observe aberrant splicing in BRAF V600E samples, where the RAF-binding domain is removed by aberrant splicing, resulting in drug-resistance to Vemurafenib, 2) aberrant SJ in VEGFA can switch from anti-angiogenic (healthy tissue) to pro-angiogenic (cancer), 3) anti-apoptotic transcript variants of BCL2L1 confer resistance to apoptosis in cancer, 4) of the 20 isoforms associated with gene CD44, 2 isoforms (involving different sets of cassette exons) are common in cancer.
Source: Aberrant RNA splicing in cancer; expression changes and driver mutations of splicing factor genes (Sveen, Kilpinen / 2015 / Oncogene)
Q: What splicing factor genes should be looked at for gene mutations?
A: stated that gene SF3B1, a splicing factor gene, is frequently mutated in samples with aberrant splicing, specifically creating novel 3' splice sites. Other splicing genes that could have mutations: CDK12, DDX5, NONO, PPP2R1A, SF3B1, U2AF1 and WT1.
Source: Aberrant RNA splicing in cancer; expression changes and driver mutations of splicing factor genes (Sveen, Kilpinen / 2015 / Oncogene)
Q: is the splice donor and splice acceptor different for plus strand genes & minus strand genes?
A: The splice site motifs are preserved for both plus & minus strands. If look at UCSC genome browser, the splice donor (5'AG|GT-3') & splice acceptor (5'-AG-3') will show up normally for plus strand genes at the splice sites. For minus strand genes, need to take the reverse complement of splice site sequence in order to see it in the plus strand sequence displayed in UCSC genome browser.
Q: What does it mean if a gene is a plus strand gene? Minus strand gene? Helpful when looking at UCSC genome browser.
A: The strand sign means where the coding strand is of the gene. So for a plus strand gene, the coding strand will be on the plus strand. For a minus strand gene, the coding strand will be on the minus strand. In UCSC genome browser, the plus strand is always displayed at the top, meaning for plus strand genes the coding sequence is as displayed at the top. For minus strand genes, the sequence is the reverse complement of the sequence displayed on UCSC. So keep in mind, if looking for a sequence motif on the coding strand on UCSC genome browser, it will show on the plus strand of plus strand genes, and then will need to take the reverse complement of the sequence motif to find it in UCSC genome browser.
Q: What is SF2/ASF?
A: SF2 = splicing factor 2. ASF = alternative splicing factor. These proteins are splicing factors involved in splicing of constitutive & alternative exons, is a member of the serine/arginine rich protein family - is essential for cell viability.
Q: What are SR proteins?
A: Serine/arginine proteins involved in RNA splicing. SR proteins recognize purine-rich ESEs that recruit spliceosome components (e.g. U2 auxiliary factor, U2AF) to splice sites.
Q: What types of proteins are involved in splicing?
A: U2AF - splicing factor made up of 2 subunits, U2AF65 & U2AF35 -> U2AF35 assists binding of U2AF65 to polypyrimidine tract upstream of 3' splice site, which recruits U2AF to precursor mRNA. snRNPs (small-nuclear ribonucleoproteins) - these types of proteins make up the spliceosome. SR proteins - recognize purine-rich ESEs that recruit spliceosome components (e.g. U2 auxiliary factor, U2AF) to splice sites.
Source: see KnowledgeTweets post "15.6.16 – Splice junctions and disease"
Q: How does splicing work with the serine/arginine splicing proteins?
A: CONJ: proteins bind to specific positions on gene, such as splice sites (donor & acceptor), splicing enhancers/silencers, and then SR proteins bind to these proteins (e.g. U2AF) to splice the mRNA transcript.
Source: see KnowledgeTweets post "15.6.16 – Splice junctions and disease"
Q: What is the nucleoplasm?
A: the substance of a cell nucleus, especially that not forming part of a nucleolus.
Q: What is a nuclear speckle?
A: Subnuclear structures that are enriched in pre-mRNA splicing factors and are located in the interchromatin regions of the nucleoplasm of mammalian cells.
Q: What is the spliceosome composed of?
A: the spliceosome, a complex macromolecular machinery composed of five small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles (U1, U2, U4, U5, and U6 snRNPs) and more than 200 auxiliary proteins. The spliceosome mediates the recognition of the short consensus sequences surrounding the 5′-(GU) and the 3′-(AG) splice site and catalyzes the two transesterification reactions necessary for the removal of the intron and ligation of the selected exons
Q: What does phosphorylation have to do with splicing?
A: Phosphorylation regulates splicing. For instance, phosphorylation of SRSF1 promotes spliceosome assembly, whereas its dephosphorylation is necessary for the catalysis of the first transesterification reaction (Ref 14 in Source). Also, both hypo- and hyperphosphorylation can inhibit splicing.
Source: Phosphorylation-Mediated Regulation of Alternative Splicing in Cancer (Naro, Sette / 2013)
Q: What kinases are responsible for phosphorylating splicing factors? Which phosphatases are involved?
A: Kinases = SRPK (SR protein kinases, i.e. kinases that phosphorylate SR proteins), CLK (cyclin-dependent Like Kinases). SRPKs can phosphorylate SR proteins both in the nucleus and in the cytoplasm, thus affecting several aspects of their function. SRPK-mediated phosphorylation of SR proteins in the cytoplasm is necessary to ensure SR proteins nuclear import (Figure 1) (Ref 44 in Source), as it enhances their interaction with the specific transportin SR2. Phosphatases = activation and inhibition of the PP1 and PP2A phosphatases are required for splicing catalysis (Ref 5 & 6 in Source).
Source: Phosphorylation-Mediated Regulation of Alternative Splicing in Cancer (Naro, Sette / 2013)
Q: Why are splice factor kinases in the cytoplasm? In the nucleus? Note that SPRK are kinases that phosphorylate SR proteins.
A: SRPK-mediated phosphorylation of SR proteins in the cytoplasm is necessary to ensure SR proteins nuclear import (Figure 1) (Ref 44), as it enhances their interaction with the specific transportin SR2. For instance, several reports suggest that SRPK-mediated phosphorylation of SRSF1 is essential for its nuclear localization and the resulting splicing activity triggered by stimulation of specific signaling pathways (i.e., IGF-1 and EGF treatments) (Ref 43, 47 in Source).
Source: Phosphorylation-Mediated Regulation of Alternative Splicing in Cancer (Naro, Sette / 2013)

<!-- Non-canonical splicing -->
Q: what are types of non-canonical splicing?
A: cryptic exons, microexons, recursive splicing, circular RNAs, retained introns, and exonic introns (exitrons)
Source: Lessons from non-canonical splicing (Sibley, Blazques, Ule / 2016 / Nature Reviews Genetics)
Q: What are cryptic exons?
A: unknown exons (not in ENSEMBL, RefSeq) that can be incorporated into mRNA transcripts once a cryptic splice site is revealed. Cryptic exons often come from transposable elements. Stated that half of the cryptic exons associated with disease arise from transposable elements, particularly Alu elements.
Source: Lessons from non-canonical splicing (Sibley, Blazques, Ule / 2016 / Nature Reviews Genetics)
Q: What are microexons?
A: exons with length < 30nt. Functionally, they are like modular parts that can add AA residues, usually charged residues that affect lipid-binding/peptide-binding domains.
Source: Lessons from non-canonical splicing (Sibley, Blazques, Ule / 2016 / Nature Reviews Genetics)
Q: what is recursive splicing?
A: ?
Q: what is circular RNA (circRNA)?
A: circularized RNA molecules because of intramolecular ligation of their 5' & 3' ends.
Q: How does circRNA splicing work? I need to be able to visualize it.
A: in Source, see figure 4a for head-to-tail splicing in circRNA & 4b) to see how circRNA can show up in RNA-seq. Head-to-tail splicing can lead to single exon, multi-exonic, or exon-intron transcript.
Source: Lessons from non-canonical splicing (Sibley, Blazques, Ule / 2016 / Nature Reviews Genetics)
Q: what happens when introns are retain in the mRNA transcript?
A: Usually the mRNA transcript is not allowed to be exported out of the nucleus, therefore it awaits for exosome-mediated degradation in the nucleus. If exported to the cytoplasm, introns usually contain a premature-termination codon (PTC) which should activate NMD.
Q: what are exitrons?
A: a nucleotide sequence that can be treated as either an exon (incorporated into mRNA) or an intron (spliced out of mRNA, known as alternative splicing). Whether it is incorporated into mRNA depends on the desired protein to be made. Mutations in exitrons can affect if they are spliced or not. Interesting questions - what factors determine if exitron is in or out of mRNA? What is hte difference between a cassette exon (alternatively-spliced exon) & exitrons?
Q: what is the difference between chimerica RNAs & gene fusions?
A: CONJ - the difference could be that with chimeric RNAs the genes still have their native structure (exons & introns are the same), but with gene fusions the chromosome had to be rearranged in order to make the "chimeric gene". So maybe chimeric RNAs are gene fusions that happen on the transcription level, whereas gene fusions happen at the genomic level.
Source: Lessons from non-canonical splicing (Sibley, Blazques, Ule / 2016 / Nature Reviews Genetics)
Q: What are ways splicing can lead to cancer?
A: One way - SJ splices in a way to inactivate tumor suppressors or activate oncogenes, directly or indirectly. Example: SJ inactivates tumor suppressor BIN1 isoform, activates kinase MNK2 (promotes MAPK-independent eIF4e phosphorylation), and activates kinase S6K1 which has oncogenic properties.
Source: The emerging role of splicing factors in cancer. (Grosso, Martins / 2008), see KnowledgeTweets post "15.6.16 – Splice junctions and disease"

<!-- RNA-seq -->
Q: what is a contig?
A: A contig (from contiguous) is a set of overlapping DNA segments that together represent a consensus region of DNA. In bottom-up sequencing (e.g. RNA-seq I think, whole genome sequencing) projects, a contig refers to overlapping sequence data (reads).
Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Contig
Q: For gene fusions, what is the advantage of RNA-seq to whole-genome sequencing?
A: Apparently not all chromosomal rearrangement events leads to transcribed gene fusions, that's why RNA-seq is better at identifying gene fusions than whole-genome sequencing. CONJ: some chromosomal rearrangements can remove expression of fusion genes (e.g. promoter region affected)
Q: What is RPKM?
A: get total number of reads that maps to exon -> divide by exon length & library size (total number of reads for sample that map to the genome). Reads per million is normalizing by library size. Reads per kilobase is normalizing by the size of the genomic region (larger region, more reads to map to that region).
Q: Advantages of RNA-seq?
A: Advantages are: 1) quantify gene expression level, even gene fusions that come from chromosomal rearrangement (not all rearrangements lead to functional gene fusions), 2) detect alternative splicing events, 3) detect all RNA species, including non-coding RNA, 4) does not require annotated genome for sequencing (unlike microarray), 5) observe the effect of mutations/indels on gene expression (modifications to regulatory genomic regions), 6) observe effect of mutations/indels on translation product.
Q: Advantages of exome sequencing?
A: Advantages are: 1) cheaper than RNA-seq & whole-genome because analyzing less genomic regions, 2) less data to handle as it only sequences exons, 3) can see copy number variants (comparing between samples), 4) single nucleotide variants detected, 5) Detect chromosomal rearrangements that do not express RNA
Q: Disadvantages of RNA-seq?
A: 1) hard to detect low expression unless high enough coverage, but higher coverage means more money & time, 2) can detect SNV but need high enough coverage again, 3) large datasets generate from RNA-seq, 4) to find genes that are rare or underexpressed, need to enrich for these genes (may require ribo-depletion - removal of ribosomal RNA) X) Is it expensive? Because it is said exome sequence is expensive compared to RNA-seq?
Q: Disadvantages of whole-genome sequencing?
A: 1) doesn't capture exons from mitochondria (might be a good thing? Not sure), 2) entire exome may not be captured, depending on the design of the capture probe, 3) apparently still costly compared to RNA-seq (HOW? WHY? I thought this is much less data than RNA-seq)
Q: How does RNA-seq work?
A: 1) removal of ribosomal RNA - select mRNA by polyA tail targeting OR rRNA depletion -> 2) fragmentation of RNA transcripts before converting to cDNA -> 3) conversion of RNA to DNA via reverse transcriptase & random oligo(dT) primers, then make DNA into double-stranded element -> 4) sequencing of cDNA and then aligning of sequences to genomic DNA.
Q: how does rRNA depletion work?
A: for Illumina's Ribo-zero product, there are 2 phases - the solid phase (beads that bind to rRNA via probe) & liquid phase (solution that contains all non-rRNA because does not bind to rRNA probes). 1) wash beads, and in parallel incubate RNA sample with rRNA probes so probes can hybridize to rRNA -> 2) mix RNA solution with beads, beads will bind to rRNA probes (somehow, I don't know how) -> centrifugate separates solid phase (rRNA) and liquid phase (non-rRNA) -> aspirate out liquid phase and place into another tube. NOTE: Illumina's probe sequences are proprietary (meaning they had to engineer these sequences to maximize rRNA capture).
Source: http://www.illumina.com/products/ribo-zero-rrna-removal-human-mouse-rat.html
Q: What things need to be decided when performing RNA-seq?
A: What type of technology to use for sequencing RNA (Illumina, Solid, IonTorrent), type of library preparation (strand-specific or not, barcode or not, amply by PCR or not, remove rRNA or use oligoT beads for polyA tail selection), what kind of sequencing (single-end or pair-end), sequencing depth (10x, 35x, 100x)
Source: http://splice-bio.com/although-rna-seq-is-very-hip-right-now-is-it-really-worth-its-money/
Q: In RNA-seq, is there bias with random primers when converting RNA to cDNA?
A: Apparently there is a bias in the first 12 nucleotides of a transcript - these are amplified much more than other nucleotides - but why? See figure 1 of Source.
Source: Biases in Illumina transcriptome sequencing caused by random hexamer priming (Hansen, Brenner / 2010)
Q: what does it mean that 1 RPKM corresponds to 1 transcript, or 3 RPKM corresponds to 1 transcript? (Not complete)
A: CONJ: depends on how spread out the exons are, i.e. how long the introns are? Perhaps for shorter introns there are more exons within a kilobase, therefore more reads can map within a kilobase I think. I think the longer the exons & the shorter the introns, the more reads that will map to a kilobase -> higher RPKM.
Source: Mapping and quantifying mammalian transcriptomes by RNA-Seq (Mortazavi, Williams / 2008 / Nature)
Q: In sequencing, what is the insert size?
A: The insert size is the length of the cDNA fragment (between the adaptors ligated at the end of the fragment), the fragment length is the length of the cDNA + both sequence adaptors, & the inner distance is the length of the region not sequenced (as for pair-end sequencing both ends are sequenced, but can't sequence the entire fragment).
Source: see KnowledgeTweets Figure 160404-1, post "16.4.4 – Algorithm for determining isoform-level expression"
Q: What is sequencing coverage?
A: coverage, analogous to depth - average # of times a particular nucleotide is represented in a collection of reads (reads is the sequenced cDNA fragments). Coverage can also be - percentage of target genome covered (# of nucleotides sequenced / total # of nucleotides in target genome). Coverage = (N * L) / G, where N = number of reads (fragments sequenced), L = average read length, G = size of genome. For example, G = 2000 base pairs, N = 8 reads, & L = 500 nucleotides will equal 4000 / 2000 = 2x redundancy. If coverage is 40x, that means that the number of reads * average read length is 40x greater than the target genome size -> CAUTION that same fragments are sequenced more frequently than others, wouldn't this mean some regions have more coverage than others?
Q: What is the polypyrimidine tract?
A: This is a stretch of C's & T's that are in the intron before the acceptor site, where the acceptor site has the motif 5'-AG-3'.
Source: see KnowledgeTweets post 10.1.2014 - Exons & alternative splicing
Q: What is exon scrambling? Apparently it can occur with RNA splicing.
A: involves the re-ordering of exons via formation of circular transcripts. Apparently this can happen in several human genes.
Source: Aberrant RNA splicing in cancer; expression changes and driver mutations of splicing factor genes (Sveen, Kilpinen / 2015 / Oncogene)
Q: When is it preferable to use shorter reads or single-ended reads? 
A: Cheaper, shorter single-end reads are better for gene-level expression in well-annotated organisms, and is cheaper. Longer reads & paired-end reads are preferable for poorly annotated transcriptomes.
Source: A survey of best practices for RNA-seq data analysis (Conesa, Madrigal / 2016 / Genome Biology)
Q: For RPKM/FPKM, what is the "million" part for? The "kilobase" part for?
A: RPKM, & FPKM, are ways of normalizing the number of reads that map to a region based on 2 factors - number of reads in library (reading depth) and genomic region size. The "million" part is for reading depth -> the greater the reading depth, the more reads that will map to a region. So this is a normalization factor, this is the RPM part (Reads per million). The "kilobase" part -> normalize by length of the genomic region that is being quantified (number of reads that map to region / length of region in nucleotides).
Q: What elements can bias RNA-seq? In other words, elements that can affect true expression of a genomic region, such as a gene?
A: Some elements are GC-content, gene length (which is considered by RPKM), positional bias, gene mappability (being able to map reads exclusively to a gene) These can skew gene expression (i.e. gene expression higher than usual, ), leading to false positives for gene expression and differential expression.
Source: Removing technical variability in RNA-seq data using conditional quantile normalization (Hansen, Irizarry / 2011)
Q: How can gene mappability affect RNA-seq?
A: CONJ: Some genomic regions have repetitive sequences that could make it more difficult to map to the reference gene, so these regions could have lower unique reads mapping to these regions.
Source: Removing technical variability in RNA-seq data using conditional quantile normalization (Hansen, Irizarry / 2011)
Q: Is gene length a systematic RNA-seq error that can be rectified by dividing the number of reads that map to the region by the region length?
A: According to the source, genes with 1000bp < length < 5000bp, reads increase linearly with increasing length (so it seems dividing by length is the appropriate thing to do). For gene length > 5000bp, the read count plateaus, which means these genes could be seen having a lower gene expression than genes near 5000bp (greater denominator but similar read count -> lower expression). For gene length < 1000bp, the read count is stronger, meaning these genes could be seen having a higher expression than should be calculated because they have more reads than expected and divided by a smaller length than the larger genes.
Source: Removing technical variability in RNA-seq data using conditional quantile normalization (Hansen, Irizarry / 2011) - see Fig 3c & 3d
Q: Why is PCR needed for RNA-seq?
A: PCR amplification only works on DNA, so unless you can obtain enough RNA to feed directly into your sequencing protocol, you need to amplify with PCR, and therefore you must reverse-transcribe to cDNA. In theory, you could probably adapt PCR to RNA using RNA-dependent RNA polymerase instead of DNA polymerase, but RdRp is a viral protein with a relatively high error rate (to facilitate rapid viral evolution), so an RNA-based PCR protocol would introduce far more errors than the combination of reverse-transcription and DNA-based PCR.
Source: https://www.biostars.org/p/54969/
Q: How are biases detected in RNA-seq?
A: Raw reads, RPKM, & FPKM are biased by gene length, GC content and dinucleotide frequencies, meaning these elements can affect the calculated gene expression (either mapped raw reads, RPKM, or FPKM).
Source: Bias detection and correction in RNA-Sequencing data (Zheng, Chung / 2011)
Q: why is strand-specific sequencing important? When should it be used and when should it not be used?
A: Becomes difficult to determine gene expression for overlapping genes - those genes that have at least partially overlapping genomic coordinates, but are transcribed from opposite strands. CONJ: As strand-specific RNA-seq is more expensive than non-strand specific, perhaps should use strand-specific protocol when dealing with many overlapping genes that are different strands of the DNA.
Source: Comparison of stranded and non-stranded RNA-seq transcriptome profiling and investigation of gene overlap (Zhao, Zhang / 2015 / BMC Genomics)
Q: What is a protocol for strand-specific RNA-seq?
A: See Source for Image! Basically, after making the first strand cDNA after complementing the RNA, dUTPs instead of dTTPs are incorporated to make the second strand of cDNA, helps discriminate between first cDNA & 2nd cDNA -> use enzyme Uracil-DNA-Glycosylase to degrade dUTP-incorporated cDNA strand. mRNA matches coding strand sequence, 1st cDNA strand marking method matches the template strand sequence, 2nd cDNA strand matches mRNA (which matches coding strand sequence). 
Source: see KnowledgeTweets post "2016.11.8 – Importance of strand-specific RNA-seq"; Comparison of stranded and non-stranded RNA-seq transcriptome profiling and investigation of gene overlap (Zhao, Zhang / 2015 / BMC Genomics)
Q: How many replicates should be used for RNA-seq experiment?
A: technical noise - need replicates to characterize that amount of noise from RNA-seq processing (RNA extraction & prep, sequencing); biological noise - amount of noise for the same sample in the same condition; RNA-seq on the nucleotide sequencing level is low noise, but RNA extraction & preparation can contribute noise to data; measure in-group variance (e.g. same tissue type) before comparing to other groups (basically, see if difference between groups is larger than intra-group noise). Expression difference (see Source Table 1) - to find smaller expression fold difference, will need more replicates; Sequencing depth
Source: A survey of best practices for RNA-seq data analysis (Conesa, Madrigal / 2016 / Genome Biology)
Q: How does gene expression fold difference affect the number of replicates needed?
A: (see Source Table 1). The effect size is the fold change difference in gene expression between samples. Increase # of replicates -> better characterizes noise (technical, biological) -> increases chances of finding differential gene expression. Decrease of effect size -> need to find finer level of gene expression differences (may need increase sequencing depth) -> harder to find differential gene expression, therefore lower percentage of differential expression between genes found for lower effect size.
Source: A survey of best practices for RNA-seq data analysis (Conesa, Madrigal / 2016 / Genome Biology)
Q: How does sequencing depth (millions of reads) affect the number of replicates needed?
A: (see Source Table 1). Increase # of replicates -> better characterizes noise (technical, biological) -> increases chances of finding differential gene expression. With increased sequencing depth -> more reads sequenced, finer resolution of gene expression as rarer transcripts are sequenced -> can be used to find differential gene expression with smaller effect size (fold change) -> increased granularity in gene expression can facilitate finding more differentially expressed genes (perhaps being able to distinguish smaller effect size).
Source: A survey of best practices for RNA-seq data analysis (Conesa, Madrigal / 2016 / Genome Biology)
Q: For RNA-seq preparation, how do I select which RNA selection scheme, polyA tail or ribodepletion?
A: If only want mRNA or RNA species with polyA tail, then use polyA selection. However, need to make sure there is enough quantity for polyadenylated RNA for a signal. If not enough signal, then will need to use ribodepletion to remove ribosomal RNA. In bacteria, RNA is not polyadenylated, so have no choice but to use ribodepletion.
Source: A survey of best practices for RNA-seq data analysis (Conesa, Madrigal / 2016 / Genome Biology)
Q: what does it mean if there is 1% variant-error rate in sequencing?
A: CONJ: I think it means for every 100 mutations found, 1 will be a sequencing error. OR maybe it means that for every 100 nucleotides sequenced, there will be 1 nucleotide that sequenced incorrectly. This is why sequencing depth (average # of times a nucleotide is sequenced) must be greater than 1x, so when piling up the reads in a given position it can be seen if it is a variant or a sequencing error - if the nucleotide differs from the genomic position & has multiple reads supporting that variant, then that variant is real & not a sequencing error.
Source: Sequencing depth and coverage: key considerations in genomic analyses. (Sims, Sudbery / 2014 / Nature Reviews Genetics)
Q: What causes the ability to detect variants (e.g. SNVs, mutations) to be decreased?
A: low-base quality & non-uniformity of coverage. Increased sequencing depth is required to offset these problems. Also, higher density coverage profiles seems to offer better coverage
Source: Sequencing depth and coverage: key considerations in genomic analyses. (Sims, Sudbery / 2014 / Nature Reviews Genetics) 
Q: what is the Phred Quality Score?
A: Score that conveys the error rate of retrieve a nucleotide base incorrectly. This "incorrectness" arises from the accuracy of the sequencing platform. Equation is Q = -10 log P, where Q = Phred quality score, P = probability of incorrectly calling a base. For example, if P = 0.01 (1 in 100 bases incorrectly called), the Q = 20. P = 0.001 (1 in 1000 bases), then Q = 30. 30 is considered the benchmark for quality in next-gen sequencing.
Source: http://www.illumina.com/documents/products/technotes/technote_Q-Scores.pdf
Q: what causes non-uniformity in coverage? (NOT DONE)
A: 1)could it be primer bias?, 2) fragment length (could it be the fragment ), 3) based on position within gene, fragment length is longer near start of exon (wouldn't it makes sense if splicing in the middle is more likely to lead to longer reads), 4) sequence preference for priming?
Source: https://liorpachter.wordpress.com/2013/10/17/non-uniform-coverage-of-transcripts-in-rna-seq-experiments/
Q: what is genome assembly?
A: A sequence assembly is breaking down a sequence into parts (fragmenting it) and reconstructing the original sequence from the fragments. So genome assembly is taking fragmented chromosome (or smaller) and reconstructing the genome from the fragments. Want to use this over reference genome technique when no annotations are available or for novel genomes.
Q: Why do you think FPKM (fragment per kilobase of exon per million reads) is used over RPKM (read per kilobase of exon per million reads) for pair-end sequencing?
A: for single-end seq, a read is the nucleotide sequence from one end of a cDNA fragment, so sequences for either end is a different read. For pair-end seq, a read is the sequence on both ends of a cDNA fragment, therefore a read should theoretically be the same if from the same fragment.
Q: what is de novo genome sequencing?
A: sequencing a novel genome where there is no reference sequence available for alignment. Sequence reads are assembled as contigs, the coverage quality of de novo sequence data depends on the size & continuity of the contigs (i.e. the number of gaps in the data).
Q: What is known thus far about alternative splicing?
A: 1) majority of genes are alternatively spliced, 2) exon skipping is the major class of alternative splicing, & exon usage varies depending on tissue type & cell type.
Source: Sequencing depth and coverage: key considerations in genomic analyses. (Sims, Sudbery / 2014 / Nature Reviews Genetics)
Q: How is the sequencing by synthesis set up before sequencing begins?
A: RNA is hydrolyzed to fragment RNA -> hydrolysis removes secondary structure that would otherwise make it harder for some primers to access -> allows primers to access these regions for reverse transcription -> RNA is reverse transcribed to cDNA by adding hexamer primers (6-nt primer) -> add adaptors to both ends of cDNA so then it can bind to glass slide full of oligonucleotides for bridge amplification and then sequencing.
Q: How does sequencing by synthesis work?
A: prepare cDNA fragment for sequencing (understand sequencing set-up) -> the strand is tethered to a solid substrate (e.g. glass, beads) -> primer is added to the adaptor of the read -> dNTPs (where N = A, T, C, G), where each base has a different color fluorescent marker -> the correct base that is added to next nucleotide fluoresces, and a camera takes a snapshot of the color emitted, and records the corresponding nucleotide based on the color -> the terminator is removed from the nucleotide just added so the next nucleotide can be added -> check fluorescence of next nucleotide & record base -> continue doing until finished sequencing strand.
Q: What are some potential issues to consider for sequencing by synthesis?
A: 1) For fluorescent nucleotides with reversible terminators, what if reversible terminator isn't removed so next nucleotide can be added - could lead to sequencing error? 2) could sequencing strand come off in the middle of sequencing (not sure about this), 3) could wrong nucleotide pair with current base position (this could be the quality score)

<!-- Fusion Genes -->
Q: what is a mate pair?
A: It is when the ends of a genomic sequence (or transcript sequence) are sequenced. This works by circularizing the DNA and then cleaving the body so that all that is left is the ends bound to each other.
Source: see KnowledgeTweets 8.19.2014 – difference between mate pair & paired end sequence
Q: what is the difference between read span break, mate pair, and mate pair break?
A: read span breaks = reads that span the fusion break, mate pair = mate pair reads that map to both sides of the fusion, mate pair break = same as the mate pair, but one of the mate pairs spans the fusion break as well.
Source: 2016.8.15 – For Gene Fusion Analysis, what is the difference between read span break, mate pair, and mate pair break?
Q: If I observe gene fusion from an RNA-seq dataset (e.g. Tophat-fusion), what is an issue with finding if this gene fusion occurred on the genomic level?
A: This is mentioned by Professor Breaker, but the reason it maybe hard to find genomic support for a gene fusion is that, unless it is somehow single-cell sequencing, there are many cells within the sample that have been sequenced (i.e. genomes from many cells are in the sequencing pool). An issue is that if the chromosomal rearrangement is rare (e.g. 1 out of 1000 cells), will need to deeply sequence the genome in order to find this particular position with this genomic rearrangement - this is most likely not going to be found since deep sequencing is expensive and the signal may not be high enough.

<!-- Evolution & Selection -->
Q: What are indicators of positive selection for a gene?
A: Positive selection is stronger in a gene if there is a high frequency of nonsynonymous mutations and a low frequency of synonymous mutations & mutations to UTR and introns. Positive selection is weaker if the opposite happens.
Source: see KnowledgeTweets 12.5.2014 – Characteristics to look for in Melanoma

<!-- Systems Biology -->
Q: What is known about gene expression noise (systems biology perspective)?
A: Noise is not only the result of mere stochasticity: some genes are systematically noisier than others; Indirect evidence of positive and negative selection suggest that it is an evolvable trait; Noisy expression can sometimes benefit the organism.
Source: http://www.mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk/genomes/guilhem/noise.html
Q: What are some important questions about noisy gene expression?
A: If gene expression is noisy in an organism, can this noisy expression be afforded by the organism or will the organism die or be negatively be affected? Can noisy expression be beneficial for an organism, or even lead to evolution?
Source: http://www.mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk/genomes/guilhem/noise.html

<!-- NEW POSTS -->
Q: does pre-mRNA have a polyA tail?
A: CONJ: I think pre-mRNA is first cleaved by an protein complex (perhaps the endonuclease complex) and then the polyA tail is synthesized using polyadenylate polymerase. Note that the polyA tail can be added to different sites at the end of the transcript - this is known as alternative polyadenylation (similar to alternative splicing).
Q: what does it mean if there is 1% variant-error rate in sequencing?
A: CONJ: I think it means for every 100 mutations found, 1 will be a sequencing error. OR maybe it means that for every 100 nucleotides sequenced, there will be 1 nucleotide that sequenced incorrectly. This is why sequencing depth (average # of times a nucleotide is sequenced) must be greater than 1x, so when piling up the reads in a given position it can be seen if it is a variant or a sequencing error - if the nucleotide differs from the genomic position & has multiple reads supporting that variant, then that variant is real & not a sequencing error.
Source: Sequencing depth and coverage: key considerations in genomic analyses. (Sims, Sudbery / 2014 / Nature Reviews Genetics)
Q: What causes the ability to detect variants (e.g. SNVs, mutations) to be decreased?
A: low-base quality & non-uniformity of coverage. Increased sequencing depth is required to offset these problems. Also, higher density coverage profiles seems to offer better coverage
Source: Sequencing depth and coverage: key considerations in genomic analyses. (Sims, Sudbery / 2014 / Nature Reviews Genetics) 
Q: what is the Phred Quality Score?
A: Score that conveys the error rate of retrieve a nucleotide base incorrectly. This "incorrectness" arises from the accuracy of the sequencing platform. Equation is Q = -10 log P, where Q = Phred quality score, P = probability of incorrectly calling a base. For example, if P = 0.01 (1 in 100 bases incorrectly called), the Q = 20. P = 0.001 (1 in 1000 bases), then Q = 30. 30 is considered the benchmark for quality in next-gen sequencing.
Source: http://www.illumina.com/documents/products/technotes/technote_Q-Scores.pdf
Q: what causes non-uniformity in coverage? (NOT DONE)
A: 1)could it be primer bias?, 2) fragment length (could it be the fragment ), 3) based on position within gene, fragment length is longer near start of exon (wouldn't it makes sense if splicing in the middle is more likely to lead to longer reads), 4) sequence preference for priming?
Source: https://liorpachter.wordpress.com/2013/10/17/non-uniform-coverage-of-transcripts-in-rna-seq-experiments/
Q: what is genome assembly?
A: A sequence assembly is breaking down a sequence into parts (fragmenting it) and reconstructing the original sequence from the fragments. So genome assembly is taking fragmented chromosome (or smaller) and reconstructing the genome from the fragments. Want to use this over reference genome technique when no annotations are available or for novel genomes.
Q: Why do you think FPKM (fragment per kilobase of exon per million reads) is used over RPKM (read per kilobase of exon per million reads) for pair-end sequencing?
A: for single-end seq, a read is the nucleotide sequence from one end of a cDNA fragment, so sequences for either end is a different read. For pair-end seq, a read is the sequence on both ends of a cDNA fragment, therefore a read should theoretically be the same if from the same fragment.
Q: what is de novo genome sequencing?
A: sequencing a novel genome where there is no reference sequence available for alignment. Sequence reads are assembled as contigs, the coverage quality of de novo sequence data depends on the size & continuity of the contigs (i.e. the number of gaps in the data).
Q: What is known thus far about alternative splicing?
A: 1) majority of genes are alternatively spliced, 2) exon skipping is the major class of alternative splicing, & exon usage varies depending on tissue type & cell type.
Source: Sequencing depth and coverage: key considerations in genomic analyses. (Sims, Sudbery / 2014 / Nature Reviews Genetics)
Q: How is the sequencing by synthesis set up before sequencing begins?
A: RNA is hydrolyzed to fragment RNA -> hydrolysis removes secondary structure that would otherwise make it harder for some primers to access -> allows primers to access these regions for reverse transcription -> RNA is reverse transcribed to cDNA by adding hexamer primers (6-nt primer) -> add adaptors to both ends of cDNA so then it can bind to glass slide full of oligonucleotides for bridge amplification and then sequencing.
Q: How does sequencing by synthesis work?
A: prepare cDNA fragment for sequencing (understand sequencing set-up) -> the strand is tethered to a solid substrate (e.g. glass, beads) -> primer is added to the adaptor of the read -> dNTPs (where N = A, T, C, G), where each base has a different color fluorescent marker -> the correct base that is added to next nucleotide fluoresces, and a camera takes a snapshot of the color emitted, and records the corresponding nucleotide based on the color -> the terminator is removed from the nucleotide just added so the next nucleotide can be added -> check fluorescence of next nucleotide & record base -> continue doing until finished sequencing strand.
Q: What are some potential issues to consider for sequencing by synthesis?
A: 1) For fluorescent nucleotides with reversible terminators, what if reversible terminator isn't removed so next nucleotide can be added - could lead to sequencing error? 2) could sequencing strand come off in the middle of sequencing (not sure about this), 3) could wrong nucleotide pair with current base position (this could be the quality score)

<!-- NEW POSTS: CHROMOSOMAL ABERRATIONS -->
Q: How do chromosomal abnormalities (change in number of chromosomes) occur?
A: Errors in meiosis or mitosis. Meiosis divides sex cells into haploid form (in humans, 46 to 23 chromosomes) and mitosis divides non-sex cells, keeps normal chromosome count (important in growing embryo) -> any abnormality in division can lead to extra chromosome or loss in chromosome. Women more prone to have errors because they are born with their eggs, they do not regenerate new sex cells like men do. Women's eggs are as old as they are, therefore can accumulate defects overtime, especially at age 35.
Q: What mechanisms are responsible for repairing DNA double-stranded breaks (DSBs)?
A: Non-homologous end joining (NHEJ), Break-induced replication (BIR), & Homologous recombination (HR). However, faulty mechanisms can lead to formation of DSBs.
Q: What is non-homologous end joining (NHEJ)?
A: NHEJ anneals ends of blunt dsDNA, usually from double-stranded break (DSB) of DNA. It's called 'non-homologous' because it doesn't care about finding homologous sequences for DNA strands on either side of the DSB. Ku protein binds to ends of blunt of dsDNA -> DNA ends need to be blunt, therefore remove nucleotide overhang via nucleases or adding bases via polymerases --> ligating blunt ends using Ligase IV which is stabilized by XRCC4. NOTE: NHEJ is error prone as it can add or remove nucleotides before joining both blunt ends.
Source: Triggers for genomic rearrangements: insights into genomic, cellular and environmental influences. (Mani, Chinnaiyan); see KnowledgeTweets post "6.25.2013 – Paper: “Genome editing with engineered zinc finger nucleases”
Q: What can lead to chromosomal translocations?
A: Double-stranded breaks (DSBs) in DNA. To simulate chromosomal translocation, introduce DSBs on 2 chromosomes to study chromosome translocation -> if cells are DNA ligase IV or XRCC4-deficient, lead to genomic translocation. Also, canonical NHEJ suppresses chromosomal translocation whereas alternative NHEJ can lead to chromosomal translocation.
Q: what are examples of replicative stress?
A: stalled or collapsed replication forks. This can be caused by defective replication machinery, incongruities in DNA when replicating (secondary structure in DNA, damage in DNA, protein adduct bound to DNA, or transcription bubble)
Q: how many DNA-damaging events in the human body?
A: Estimated that 2*10^4 DNA-damaging events, largely from reactive-oxygen species (ROS) occur in every cell in the human body everyday.
Source: Triggers for genomic rearrangements: insights into genomic, cellular and environmental influences. (Mani, Chinnaiyan)
Q: what can cause chromosomal rearrangement? Is this the same as chromosomal abnormalities?
A: proximity between genes - closer genes are, increase chance of recombination. DNA breaks can cause chromosomal rearrangement. DNA breaks are caused by biological stress (e.g. genotoxic, oxidative, replicative). Also template strand switching can during DNA replication - results in a newly synthesized strand is a result of a sequence from different genomic regions).
Source: Triggers for genomic rearrangements: insights into genomic, cellular and environmental influences. (Mani, Chinnaiyan)
Q: What can cause chromosomal abnormalities to occur?
A: Double stranded breaks (DSBs) that can be caused by genotoxic stress (radiation, chemical compounds), replicative stress (collapsed replication forks), oxidative stress (increase in ROS, imbalance in production & degradation of ROS). Alternative NHEJ can lead to chromosomal translocation or defects in Ligase IV or XRCC4 (canonical NHEJ suppresses translocation). But what about defects in DNA repair mechanisms (Homology-dependent vs. homology-independent repair mechanisms): NHEJ, homologous recombination, DNA repair??
Source: Triggers for genomic rearrangements: insights into genomic, cellular and environmental influences. (Mani, Chinnaiyan)
Q: What can cause replicative stress?
A: DNA incongruities, such as secondary structure, damage, protein adduct, or transcription bubble. DNA incongruities -> Replication Fork Stalling -> collapse of replication fork -> Double-stranded DNA break -> lead to chromosomal rearrangement.
Source: Triggers for genomic rearrangements: insights into genomic, cellular and environmental influences. (Mani, Chinnaiyan)

Q: what is difference between chromatids & chromosomes?
A: The chromosome is composed of sister chromatids attached to each other by a centromere. The centromere divides the chromosome into 2 region, a region with smaller arms (p region) & the region with longer arms (the q region).
Q: What is reciprocal recombination?
A: Reciprocal recombination is homologous recombination where corresponding regions of chromosomal DNA exchange positions. 
Q: What is non-reciprocal recombination?
A: Nonreciprocal recombination is recombination of chromosomal DNA where a region of DNA is removed from one strand and translocated to another strand. No DNA takes the place of the strand that was translocated.
Q: What is Break-induced replication (BIR)? (NOT DONE)
A: DNA repair mechanism that repairs double-stranded breaks (DSB) in DNA. Method of repair: DSB --> 5' to 3' exonulcease digests one of the strands of the double-stranded break -> Rad51 (human) or RecA (bacteria) protein binds to ssDNA -> looks for homologous sequence in genome -> restart DNA replication to allow ssDNA to elongate - basically new replication fork.
Source: see KnowledgeTweets post 2016.9.19 – What is Break-induced Repair (BIR)?
Q: What is homologous recombination (HR)? (NOT DONE)
A: CONJ: Is it when homologous stretches of a chromosome (similar in sequence) switches places on different places of the chromosome. Analogous to 2 people swapping legs so part of their leg is their own but the other part is from someone else (though this is not possible lol).


<!-- NEW POSTS: TRANSCRIPTION TERMINATION -->
Q: What is the usual length of a transcript?
A: The median length of human transcripts is 2186 nt, with the longest transcripts having sizes of up to 101,206 nt. (These numbers are based on UCSC hg19 annotation.)
Source: Detecting differential usage of exons from RNA-seq data (Anders, Reyes / 2012)
Q: How do I account for biological variability? 
A: For technical variability, need to extract analytes & analyze them from the same experiment (e.g. same culture dish). For biological variability, need to do the same as technical variability, but between experiments with the same condition (e.g. 2 different culture dishes with same treatment/condition)
Source: see KnowledgeTweets post 16.4.29 – Biological experiments: technical replicates versus biological replicates
Q: how to quantify differential gene expression? (NOT DONE)
A: CONJ: Need to consider TPM instead of RPKM, FPKM. As of now, calculate RPKM or FPKM for each gene in a sample, and compare between samples. BUT HOW DO I ACCOUNT FOR technical noise & biological noise??
Source: Detecting differential usage of exons from RNA-seq data (Anders, Reyes / 2012), https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TTUrtCY2k-w 
Q: In prokaryotes, how does Rho-dependent termination work?
A: Rho-dependent: Rho binds to and is activated by Rho-Utilization site (Rut) -> Rho hydrolyzes ATP to move from 5' to 3' end of mRNA toward RNAP II where RNAP II is at the transcription stop point (tsp) -> allosteric interaction between Rho & RNAP releases RNAP from mRNA. Note that Rut is a cytosine-rich region downstream of translation stop signal known as the Rho-Utilization site, activates Rho. What is the transcription stop point (tsp), is it the stop codon?
Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Terminator_(genetics)
Q: In prokaryotes, how does Rho-independent termination work?
A: Rho-independent: GC-rich region downstream of stop codon makes hairpin -> stretch of poly-T's on DNA proceeds the hairpin, therefore the mRNA has GC-hairpin followed by 7-9nt "U-Tract" (isn't it suppose to be an "A-tract"?) -> then protein NusA (elongation protein facotr) binds to hairpin -> hairpin causes RNAP to stall and destabilize -> NusA and the hairpin interact with RNAP to release RNAP from mRNA. 
Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Terminator_(genetics)
Q: How does eukaryotic transcription termination work?
A: RNAP reaches a signal to be cleaved (polyA signals are transcribed into mRNA) -> signal changes something (proteins on RNAP shift to cleave mRNA at position) -> proteins perform function (mRNA freed by proteins cleaving at AAUAAA) -> mRNA is polyadenylated by polyadenylate polymerase. Proteins involved in cleavage are CPSF (Cleavage & Polyadenylation Specificity Factor) and CSF (cleavage stimulatory factor).
Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Terminator_(genetics)

<!-- NEW POST: Transcriptional Biology -->
Q: what is cap analysis of gene expression (CAGE)?
A: CAGE is a short tag sequences that maps to the 5' end of a transcript (the transcript's start site) - used to see if a gene is expressed. This can't be used to determine isoform expression or if transcript contains alterations (e.g. mutations).
Source: Sequencing depth and coverage: key considerations in genomic analyses. (Sims, Sudbery / 2014 / Nature Reviews Genetics)


<!-- MCDB Presentation 10.28.2016 -->
Q: what is sequence capture?
A: enriching DNA or RNA fragments by hybridizing to primers.
Q: what fraction of RNA in mammalian cells are made up of ribosomal RNA (rRNA)?
A: 90% of total RNA is rRNA.
Source: A survey of best practices for RNA-seq data analysis (Conesa, Madrigal / 2016 / Genome Biology)
Q: what fraction of RNA in mammalian cells are made up of messenger RNA (mRNA)?
A: 1-2% of total RNA is mRNA.
Source: A survey of best practices for RNA-seq data analysis (Conesa, Madrigal / 2016 / Genome Biology)
Source: Sequencing depth and coverage: key considerations in genomic analyses. (Sims, Sudbery / 2014 / Nature Reviews Genetics)
Q: what is the rRNA?
A: ribosomal rRNA are RNA elements that make up the ribosome, and make up 90% of total RNA in a cell. rRNA are synthesized in nucleolus. In bacteria, ribosomes are made up of 1 large rRNA (50S) and 1 small rRNA (30S). rRNAs form secondary structures, act as a scaffold for holding proteins together in ribosome, and recognize conserved portions of mRNAs and tRNAs (e.g. start codon, stop codon?).
Q: What is the nucleolus?
A: Dense areas in the nucleus that contain the rRNA genes and are responsible for synthesize rRNA and ribosome. Subassembly of ribosomes occur here.
Q: How are MISO & Cuffdiff2 similar?
A: Both try to infer the isoform abundances for each gene based on mapped reads. Both require genome annotations of splice isoforms (though Cuffdiff2 can incorporate novel splicing events). Difficult for genes with many isoforms - As the number of isoforms increases, so do the degrees of freedom in the model, such that the confidence intervals for each isoform also increase. So looks at entire reconstruction of isoform transcript as opposed to specific exons or splice sites (e.g. aberrant SJ, exon skip) like DEXSeq or DSGseq.
Source: A survey of software for genome-wide discovery of differential splicing in RNA-Seq data (Hooper / 2014)
Q: How does MISO work?
A: Unlike Cuffdiff2, MISO outputs info about detect splicing differences such as exon/junctions involved, alternative splice type (e.g. skipped exon, mutually exclusive exons, retained intron, alternative 5' or 3' splice site). One drawback is that MISO lacks satistical methods for handling groups of samples.
Source: A survey of software for genome-wide discovery of differential splicing in RNA-Seq data (Hooper / 2014)
Q: How does Cuffdiff2 work?
A: Cuffdiff2 returns list of differentially spliced genes, but no indication of exons/junctions involved. Unlike MISO, Cuffdiff2 can incorporate novel splicing events when determining isoform abundance, and has statistical power for multiple samples and/or biological replicates.
Source: A survey of software for genome-wide discovery of differential splicing in RNA-Seq data (Hooper / 2014)
Q: Similarities between DEXSeq & DSGseq?
A: This algorithms look at exon usage for differential splicing instead of entire isoform. They calculate read density to exon, data dispersion is modeled, but splice junction information is ignored. These algorithms don't do 2-way comparisons - both require group of samples and look for differences between groups, only consider annotated exons such as RefSeq and Ensembl, biases against small exons 
Source: A survey of software for genome-wide discovery of differential splicing in RNA-Seq data (Hooper / 2014)
Q: What is SpliceCompass algorithm?
A: Also determines differential splicing based on exon usage. SpliceCompass corrects for errors on small exons and can accomodate on unannotated splicing, but does not report on differential exon or splicing, just on gene level.
Source: A survey of software for genome-wide discovery of differential splicing in RNA-Seq data (Hooper / 2014)
Q: What is MATS algorithm?
A: Also looks locally at splice junctions (like DEXSeg, DSGseq, SpliceCompass) and the flanking exons, using a metric PSI (percent spliced in) to determine exon incorporation. Can compare 2 or more samples, however MATS does not look at first or last exon, only the adjacent exons of a splice junction.
Source: A survey of software for genome-wide discovery of differential splicing in RNA-Seq data (Hooper / 2014)
Q: For the MATS algorithm for determining differential splice junctions, the MATS algorithm only looks at flaking exons instead of the first and last exon. Why is it important to look at the first and last exon?
A: The first and last exon contain the UTRs where most post-transcriptional regulatory sequences are found. So MATS can be used for determine alternative splicing, yet is problematic if the experimental question involves post-transcriptional regulation.
Source: A survey of software for genome-wide discovery of differential splicing in RNA-Seq data (Hooper / 2014)
Q: what are batch effects? (see reference 9-11)
A: Batch effects is basically the preparation of the samples affecting the analysis (technical noise). This can be caused by laboratory conditions, reagents use, and human-contributing differences (i.e. 2 different people can handle the sample differently, which can contribute to variability between even identical datasets). To minimize batch effects, make sure one person uses the same process to prepare the samples. For example, if Neo & I make cupcakes and use the same exact recipe, they could taste different because of the differences we contribute to the process (style of handling dough, reagents used, etc.) To make sure of consistency, make sure just one of us prepares the cupcakes instead.
Source: Tackling the widespread and critical impact of batch effects in high-throughput data. (Leek, Scharpf / 2010 / Nature Review Genetics)
Q: What is size selection in RNA-seq?
A: Size selection occurs after RNA fragmentation, before reverse transcription. Select RNA fragments based on appropriate size (nucleotide length), such as separating miRNA from long ncRNA. Size exclusion gel can be used to for filtering fragments of specific size.




<!-- INCOMPLETE -->
Q: For pair-end sequencing, how is the sequence for both ends of the fragment recorded? (NOT DONE)
A: CONJ: perhaps the ligated adaptors have some sort of "code" to keep track of a specific fragment? But then how would they make sure the same adaptor-pairs are on the ends of the same fragment?
Q: what do the following mean in terms of mutations: amorph, hypomorph, hypermorph, antimorph, neomorph?
A: ?
Q: What can cause oxidative stress?
A: (NOT DONE) CONJ: downregulation of enzymes that decrease ROS, what else??
Source: Triggers for genomic rearrangements: insights into genomic, cellular and environmental influences. (Mani, Chinnaiyan)
Q: What is the TRAMP complex? (NOT DONE)
A: interacts with exosome, helicase, and poly(A)polymerase; 3' end degradation of rRNA and snoRNAs; involved in nuclear surveillance - turnover of ncRNA and intergenic transcripts
Q: What does the UTR do? (Not Done)
A: 5' UTR usually in first exon; 5' has 7-methylguanosine cap - cap protects from degradation & assists in ribosomal translation; eukaryotic 5' UTR contains Kozak sequence involved in starting translation (in prokaryotes has Shine-Delgarno sequence that initiates translation); 3' UTR usually coding by last exon; 3' UTR contains polyA tail; some UTRs involved in alternative splicing (NOT SURE HOW??)
Source: see KnowledgeTweets post 16.6.9 – 5’ UTR & 3’ UTR; post 8.19.2014 - Paper: Molecular mechanisms regulating mRNA stability: physiological and pathological significance (Knapinska / 2005)
Q: What is Nrd1-complex? (NOT DONE)
A: complex that regulates (e.g. degrades) ncRNA; consists of Nrd1, Nab3, & Sen1 helicase. Is there a way it detects ncRNA?
Q: When to use RPKM or FPKM? When to use TPM? When to use CPM?
A:???



Q: what is known about aberrant splicing in cancer?
A:---
-function of aberrant SJ unknown
    -aberrant SJ -> VEGFA -> pro- to anti-angigenic isoform from cancer to healthy tissue
    -anti-apoptotic transcript variants of BCL2L1 confer resistance to apoptosis in cancer
    -CD44 -> 2 splicing variants common in cancer
-Not known of Genome-wide aberrant splicing patterns that can serve as biomarkers for disease
-no comprehensive overview of aberrant SJ available yet
    -says "aberrant structural transcript variation" -> is this how mRNA fold is affected by splicing?
-observe alternative splicing signatures in EMT (epithelial-mesenchymal transition)
-in lymphocytic leukemia -> 2000 genes exhibited different splicing isoform ratios between cancer & normal cells
-found cancer-specific isoform switches found to be independent of somatic mutations -> implies a mechanism different from mutation is involved in splicing dysregulation
-splicing variants themselves can be biomarkers for cancer (e.g. CD44)
-aberrant splicing confers BRAF-drug resistance to vemurafenib
Source: Aberrant RNA splicing in cancer; expression changes and driver mutations of splicing factor genes (Sveen, Kilpinen / 2015 / Oncogene)